# API

This document defines the API for Device to Controller communications.

This document is version 2, and all endpoints will begin with `/api/v2`.

## Definitions

1. `API`: This API for Device-to-Controller communications.
2. `Device`: an independent computation Device that runs an engine and is controlled via a centralized control system. Normally, it runs [EVE](https://lfedge.org/projects/eve).
3. `Controller`: A centralized unit that can control one or more Devices. It can be in the cloud, on a laptop, on a Device itself, or anywhere.
4. `UUID`: A [universally unique identifier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier) for a Device within the realm of a Controller.

## Responsibilities

### Device

A Device MUST be able to boot independently of a Controller, as defined in this document. The independent boot mechanism MAY be a local flash or disk, an attached storage Device like a media card or CD/DVD, network boot, or any other method. A Controller MAY _also_ provide boot services such as iPXE, but that is NOT part of the Controller's responsibilities according to this document.

A Device MUST register with a Controller in an agreed and secure fashion, to be detailed below. It is NOT the responsibility of the Controller to seek out and find Devices.

A Device MUST retrieve its configuration from its Controller.

A Device MUST check for updated configuration on a periodic basis. The period for refresh is implementation-dependent and is NOT defined in this document.

A Device MUST use the communications, authentication and authorization channels described in this document.

A Device MUST NOT generate its own UUID. Rather, it MUST receive its UUID from its Controller via its first `config` API call. A Device MUST submit its UUID with each request other than `register` and `ping`, and it MUST check its current UUID against the returned UUID with each request from the `config` endpoint.

A Device MUST generate its own unique Device certificate and key. This specification does NOT define the mechanism by which a Device is to do so, as it is implementation-dependent. It is RECOMMENDED that a Device use hardware security, where possible, such as TPM or TEE, to protect the Device private key.

A Device MUST have a method of knowing or discovering its Controller URL. This specification does NOT define the mechanism by which a Device is to do so, as it is implementation-dependent.

A Device MUST maintain and persist its own current state such that it survives reboots and process restarts. This includes UUID and configuration parameters. This specification does NOT define the mechanism by which each Device is to do so.

### Controller

A Controller MUST be available for response to Device requests.

A Controller MUST be accessible to all Devices that need to reach it. If it cannot be accessed due to network limitations, the necessary proxies and other network traversal solutions should be made available. Those solutions are implementation-dependent and are not defined in this specification.

A Controller MUST listen for https on a port. The specific port is not specified in this document, however, it is RECOMMENDED to use the well-known https port of 443 where possible. A Controller MUST expose all of the endpoints listed in this document. A Controller MAY additionally listen on other ports, and MAY expose additional endpoints defined in this document, provided those endpoints do NOT conflict with those defined in this document, and use the "Extensions" provision listed herein.

A Controller MUST generate a UUID for each Device. The UUID MUST be unique across all Devices managed by the Controller. The Controller SHOULD use an approach to generating UUIDs which minimizes the probability of UUID collisions with UUIDs generated by all Controllers everywhere.

## Messages

All messages are defined in subdirectories to the [proto](./proto) directory.
In general, there is one directory for each API endpoint:

* `register`: The register message sent as part of onboarding a device
* `config`: The ConfigRequest message sent from the device and the ConfigResponse with EdgeDevConfig message sent from Controller to Device in response.
* `info`: The ZInfoMsg message sent from Device to Controller when there is a state change for an object (device, app instance, etc
)
* `metrics`: The ZMetricMsg message sent from Device to Controller periodically to report on resource usage etc.
* `logs`: The LogBundle message sent from Device to Controller containing internal device logs.
* `apps/instanceid/{app-instance-uuid}/logs`: The LogBundle message sent from Device to Controller containing application console device logs.
* `certs`: The ZControllerCert message is sent from Controller to Device, and contains the list of certificates used by Controller. Each ZControllerCert message replaces the current list on the device with the new list of certificates. Therefore, if an empty list is sent, it resets the list on the receiving side.
* `uuid`: This API is used by the device to fetch its unique idenitifier allocated by the Controller. Along with the uuid, the reply for this request will also contain manufacturer and product model of the device.
* `attest`: This API anchors all trust and attestation operations from the device. At the top level, the device does a POST of `ZAttestReq` and gets `ZAttestResp` as the response from Controller.

`ZAttestReq` supports 4 types of requests:
`ATTEST_REQ_CERT` is for sending certificates used by device,
`ATTEST_REQ_NONCE` is for nonce request,
`ATTEST_REQ_QUOTE` is for sending attestation quote, and
`Z_ATTEST_REQ_TYPE_STORE_KEYS` is for sending encrypted data to be saved by Controller and retrievable by the device post successful attestation.

`ZAttestResponse` is the response from Controller for `ZAttestReq`. `ZAttestResp` also has 4 response types:
`ATTEST_RESP_CERT` is response for posting EVE certificates,
`ATTEST_RESP_NONCE` carries the nonce requested by device,
`ATTEST_RESP_QUOTE` carries the result of remote attestation, and
`Z_ATTEST_RESP_TYPE_STORE_KEYS` provides response to `Z_ATTEST_REQ_TYPE_STORE_KEYS`.

`ZAttestQuote` carries PCR Quote generated by Trusted Platform Module. `ZCert` encapsulates a device certificate, with a set of attributes listed by `ZCertAttr`. If `isMutable` attribute is not set, a certificate once posted can not be overwritten by another certificate of the same `ZCertType`. This attribute can be used to prevent a compromised device from replacing its certs in the Controller, probably to use software based certs instead of certs rooted in Trusted Platform Module. `AttestStorageKeys` carries encrypted information to be saved by the Controller and only returned to the device post successful attestation.

## Authentication

All communication messages MUST be encrypted with TLS v1.2 or higher, and MUST authenticate the server using TLS. It is RECOMMENDED to use TLS v1.3 or higher to provider better privacy for the Device certificate and faster communication initialization. There is no client TLS authentication in this version of the API.

In addition the payload of the message MUST use the [auth.AuthContainer](./proto/auth/auth.proto) to provide end-to-end integrity of the message payload in the presence of MiTM TLS proxies and/or server-side load balancers. More information about this object signing is in [Object Signing](./OBJECT-SIGNING.md).

The messages sent by the device use two types of certificates sign the AuthContainers:

* Onboarding: These MUST be used only for initial Device registration via the `/register` endpoint or for the `/ping` endpoint prior to registration, and MUST NOT be used again thereafter.
* Device: These MUST be used for all communications after the initial Device registration.

A Controller MUST NOT expose other any endpoints that do not offer TLS encryption. A Controller MUST NOT offer any other endpoints in the edge device path `/api/v2/edgedevice/` that do not use the AuthContainer.

The `ping` endpoint may be useful for a Device to check connectivity before registering. Since the device has not yet registered, it MUST use its onboarding certificate to authenticate to the `ping` endpoint. The Controller SHOULD rate limit the endpoint when authenticated via onboarding certificate. A Device MUST expect that its Controller may rate limit the `ping` endpoint, and have an appropriate backoff scheme for retrying.

The `certs` API is used early during device initialization to bootstrap the use of the AuthContainer. It is protected by server TLS, but also the received signature chains are the verified against the trusted root. The Controller SHOULD rate limit the endpoint and a Device MUST expect that its Controller may rate limit the endpoint, and have an appropriate backoff scheme for retrying.

The common return codes for failed authentication or authorization are:

* In the case of a missing or invalid client certificate, a Controller MUST return a `400` or `401` http error code.
* In the case of a valid client certificate but an endpoint to which the certificate does NOT have access, whether an endpoint listed in this specification or a custom endpoint, a Controller MUST return a `400` or `403` http error code.

Additional return codes are defined in this specification for each endpoint as necessary.

## Extensions

A Controller MAY offer additional API endpoints under the path `/ext` after the `/api` and version prefix. This is to ensure no conflict with existing or future official endpoints.

For example, an endpoint called "custom" would be:

   GET /api/v2/ext/custom

An endpoint specific called "check" specific to edge devices would be:

   GET /api/v2/edgedevice/id/{uuid}/ext/check

Because the endpoint is under the `/edgedevice/` path, it MUST be encrypted using TLS and the payload be authenticated using AuthContainer.

## Mime Types

All `GET` requests MUST have no mime type set.
All `POST` requests MUST have the mime type set of `application/x-proto-binary`.
All responses with a body MUST have the mime type set of `application/x-proto-binary`.

## Endpoints

The following are the API endpoints that MUST be implemented by a Controller. All of these endpoints MUST be encrypted and authenticated.

### Register

Register a new Device for the first time.

   POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/register

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Valid registration: `201`
* Repeat valid registration for Device: `200`
* Duplicate Device: `409`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use the onboarding certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The Controller MAY retain the onboarding certificate or information within it for further purposes.

The request mime type MUST be "application/x-proto-binary".
The request MUST have the body of a single protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [register.ZRegisterMsg](./proto/register/register.proto). The message MUST include the Device certificate. The full onboarding certificate MUST be included in the senderCert in the AuthContainer to facilitate the lookup of on the controller side.

The message SHOULD include a serial string or other unique identifier for the Device.

The combination of onboard certificate and serial MUST be unique to each Device. Each item on its own, serial or onboard certificate, MAY be duplicated.
In the case of an attempt to register a combination of onboard certificate+serial that already has been registered:

* If the proposed device certificate is identical to the one already registered, then the Controller MUST return a "OK 200" status code.
* If the proposed device certificate is different from the one already registered, then the Controller MUST return a "Conflict 409" status code.

A Controller MAY require pre-registration of onboarding certificates, serial or a combination thereof prior to accepting a Device register request. In the case where a Controller requires pre-registration, yet a Device attempts to use the `register` endpoint prior to pre-registration, a Controller MUST return an "Unauthorized 403".

This specification recognizes two use cases for device registration:

* Onboarding: A Device with an appropriate onboarding certificate and serial string can register. The Device calls the `/register` endpoint to register its unique device certificate.
* Registered: A Device with a unique device certificate has already had its certificate registered with the Controller. The Device does not call the `/register` endpoint, as it already is registered. Instead, it moves directly to the `/config` endpoint to retrieve its configuration.

Additional registration flows, including a unique Device certificate signed by a CA recognized by the Controller, and a CSR-based flow, are under consideration for future versions of this specification.

Response:

The response MUST NOT contain any body content.

### Ping

Check connectivity between Device and Controller.

   GET /api/v2/edgeDevice/ping

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `200`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST NOT contain any body content.

Response:

The response MUST NOT contain any body content.

### Configuration

Retrieve configuration for a specific Device.

   POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/id/{uuid}/config

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `200`
* Unknown Device: `400`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`
* Attestation Failure, retry after a successful attestation: 403

Request:

The request MUST use the Device certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The senderCerthash MUST be set to the hash of the Device certificate.

The request mime type MUST be "application/x-proto-binary".
The request MUST have the body of a single protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [config.ConfigRequest](./proto/config/devconfig.proto). The message should include the previous configHash from a previous ConfigResponse message to reduce network utilization when there is no configuration change. It should also provide a valid value in `integrity_token`, reflecting the value received from the Controller in the last successful remote attestation cycle.

Response:

The response mime type MUST be "application/x-proto-binary".
The response MUST contain a single protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [config.ConfigResponse](./proto/config/devconfig.proto).

If `integrity_token` value is not matching the copy stored in Controller, Controller should reject this config request with return code 403, indicating Attestation Failure. Device receiving such return code should complete a successful attestation cycle with Controller, get the latest value for `integrity_token`, and then resume config request with that latest value.

If the configHash is the same as in the ConfigRequest then the EdgeDevConfig should not be included. Otherwise the EdgeDevConfig will contain the entire configuration for the given Device.

The response body MUST contain the UUID for the Device unless the configHash is the same. The Controller MUST NOT assume that the Device already has the UUID.

#### Arbitrary Config Variables

The `config` endpoint, specifically the `EdgeDevConfig` message, supports arbitrary key/value pairs. These are intended to send implementation-specific configuration to a Device. For example, it might control the frequency of downloading configs, enable debug logging or enable a USB port.

The `EdgeDevConfig` message can contain zero, one or more `ConfigItem` entries, each of which is an arbitrary key/value pair. These SHOULD be used to send implementation-specific configuration to a Device, other than configuration already defined in this API or the messages. The items are defined in [configuration properties](../docs/CONFIG-PROPERTIES.md)

### Controller Certificates

Retrieve Certificates that Controller will use. Controller can include one or more certificates in the response, and include information about each certificate such as unique identifier for the certificate, the target usage for the certificate and any other properties related to the certificate. Each certificate MUST be a X.509 certificate in PEM format. The device will verify the certificate chains against its trusted root certificate.

   GET /api/v2/edgeDevice/certs

Return codes:

* No such certificates to send: `404`
* One or more certificates found: `200`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use HTTP for this request

The request MUST NOT contain any body content

Response:

The response mime type MUST be "application/x-proto-binary".
The response MUST contain a message with a list of certificates Controller is using. The body MUST be a protobuf message of type [certs.ZControllerCert](./proto/certs/certs.proto).

### Attestation

This API anchors all operations related to attestation and trust of a device

POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/id/{uuid}/attest

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Success: `201`
* Unknown Device: `400`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request mime type MUST be "application/x-proto-binary".

The body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [attest.ZAttestReq](./proto/attest/attest.proto). `ZAttestReq` has `reqType` which MUST be filled by device to identify type of the request.

If `reqType` is `ATTEST_REQ_CERT`, `certs` should be filled with certificates used by device. If `isIMutable` attribute is not set, Controller should reject any request that would overwrite an existing certificate previously published.

If `reqType` is `ATTEST_REQ_NONCE`, no other field needs to be set in `ZAttestReq`.

If `reqType` is `ATTEST_REQ_QUOTE`, then `quote` MUST be populated with the following information: `attestData` containing [TPMS_ATTEST structure defined in TCG](https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-Rev-2.0-Part-2-Structures-01.38.pdf), `signature` containing signature of `TPMS_ATTEST` by the attestation signing key, `pcr_values` containing values of PCR 0-15, `event_log` containing TPM Event Log (aka measurement logs) with each event entry of the format `TpmEventLogEntry`,  `versions` containing current versions of various software components running on the device(e.g. EVE, UEFI etc), `gps_info` containing GPS coordinates of device's geo-location.

If `reqType` is `Z_ATTEST_REQ_TYPE_STORE_KEYS`, then `storage_keys` field must be filled with the following information: `integrity_token` containing integrity_token value given by Controller for the current attestation cycle and `keys` containing keys of type `AttestVolumeKey`, which are the decryption keys used by the device for encryption of its volume(s)

Response:

The response mime type MUST be "application/x-proto-binary".
The body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [attest.ZAttestResp](./proto/attest/attest.proto).
`ZAttestResp` has `respType` which MUST be filled by Controller.

If `respType` is `ATTEST_RESP_CERT`, no other field needs to be set.

If `respType` is `ATTEST_RESP_NONCE`, nonce field MUST be set.

If `respType` is `ATTEST_RESP_QUOTE`, then `quoteResp` MUST be filled with the result of quote verification, with `ATTEST_RESPONSE_SUCCESS` on successful verification of PCR quote, `ATTEST_RESPONSE_NONCE_MISMATCH` indicating that nonce in the `attestData` is not matching nonce expected from controller, `Z_ATTEST_RESPONSE_CODE_NO_CERT_FOUND` when Controller has not received attestation certificate yet, `ATTEST_RESPONSE_QUOTE_FAILED` when quote provided did not pass verification checks in controller. Additionally, when `quoteResp` has response code as `ATTEST_RESPONSE_SUCCESS`, the response must also fill `integrity_token` providing a token to present in the subsequent config requests, and a set of `AttestVolumeKey` values containing decryption keys for volume storage vault(s) for unlocking volumes on the device.

If `respType` is `Z_ATTEST_RESP_TYPE_STORE_KEYS`, then `storage_keys_resp` must be populated with the result, with `ATTEST_STORAGE_KEYS_RESPONSE_CODE_SUCCESS` when the information was successfully stored against this device in Controller, and with `ATTEST_STORAGE_KEYS_RESPONSE_CODE_ITOKEN_MISMATCH` if there is a mismatch between the presented value for `integrity_token` and the copy stored in Controller.

### Info

Send Device status information to Controller

   POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/id/{uuid}/info

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `201`
* Unknown Device: `400`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use the Device certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The senderCerthash MUST be set to the hash of the Device certificate.

The request MUST be of mime type "application/x-proto-binary".

The request body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [info.ZInfoMsg](./proto/info/info.proto). The message itself MUST be one of the types defined as [info.ZInfoTypes](./proto/info/info.proto).

The request body MUST indicate the type of information it is sending, and the content thereof. It MUST be one of:

* Device via `ZInfoDevice`: information about the Device itself, including baseos version, update of baseos, etc.
* Application via `ZInfoApp`: information about an application running on the Device, including running, started, stopped, downloaded, version, etc.
* Network via `ZInfoNetworkInstance`: information about networking on the Device, including ports, connectivity, assignment, etc.
* Volume via `ZInfoVolume`: information about storage volumes on the Device.
* Content tree via `ZInfoContentTree`: information about the root of immutable content trees on the Device.
* List of blobs via `ZInfoBlobList`: information about the blobs (aka layers) which make up the nodes in a content tree.
* List of tasks via `ZInfoDeviceTasks`: information about the containerd tasks present on the device.
* App instance metadata via `ZInfoAppInstMetaData`: information about the app instance meta data like kubeconfig, etc. Max size of data is less than equal to 32KB.

An information message is expected to be reliable. A Device MUST retry until it successfully delivers information messages. How often information messages are sent, retries and other caching mechanisms on the Device are NOT specified here, as they are implementation questions.

Response:

The response MUST contain no body content.

### metrics

Send Device and Application metrics to Controller

   POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/id/{uuid}/metrics

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `201`
* Unknown Device: `400`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use the Device certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The senderCerthash MUST be set to the hash of the Device certificate.

The request MUST be of mime type "application/x-proto-binary".

The request body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [metrics.ZMetricMsg](./proto/metrics/metrics.proto). The message itself contains metrics of the following combinations:

* zero or one Device metrics `DeviceMetric`
* zero, one or many application metrics `appMetric`
* zero, one or many network metrics `ZMetricNetworkInstance`

A metrics message is NOT expected to be reliable. A Device SHOULD expect that some metrics messages will be lost. A Controller MUST NOT expect that it has received all of the metrics from a Device. Metric values in a metrics message SHOULD be cumulative, such that the loss of one or more metrics messages results in the loss of precision in the time domain alone, and not in the loss of any other information.

A Device SHOULD bundle many metrics together into a single `ZMetricMsg`. The choice of how many to bundle together, and how often to send them, is implementation-dependent.

Response:

The response MUST contain no body content.

### logs

Send Device logs to Controller

   POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/id/{uuid}/logs

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `201`
* Unknown Device: `400`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use the Device certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The senderCerthash MUST be set to the hash of the Device certificate.

The request MUST be of mime type "application/x-proto-binary".

The request body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [log.LogBundle](./proto/logs/log.proto). The message itself contains zero, one or more entries of type [log.LogEntry](./proto/logs/log.proto).

Each `LogEntry` is a single log message indicating its timestamp, source, severity, message ID, application or process ID, and arbitrary message content. In addition, it can content an unlimited number of key/value pairs.

A Device SHOULD bundle many log messages together into a single `LogBundle`.

A `LogBundle` MUST NOT be larger than the maximum size specified by the Controller for the Device, but MAY be smaller than that, if insufficient messages are available or the Device network or endpoints cannot handle the maximum size. The Device MUST retrieve the maximum `LogBundle` message size from the appropriate field of the configuration.

A log message is expected to be reliable. A Device MUST retry until it successfully delivers log messages. How often log messages are sent, retries, the number of messages and which types to bundle together into a single `LogBundle`,  and other caching mechanisms on the Device are NOT specified here, as they are implementation questions.

Response:

The response MUST contain no body content.

### Application Instance logs

Send Application logs to Controller

   POST api/v2/edgeDevice/apps/instanceid/{app-instance-uuid}/logs

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `201`
* Unknown Application Instance: `400`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use the Device certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The senderCerthash MUST be set to the hash of the Device certificate.

The request MUST be of mime type "application/x-proto-binary".

The request body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [log.AppInstanceLogBundle](./proto/logs/log.proto). The message itself contains zero, one or more entries of type [log.LogEntry](./proto/logs/log.proto).

Each `LogEntry` is a single log message indicating its timestamp, source, severity, message ID, application or process ID, and arbitrary message content. In addition, it can contain an unlimited number of key/value pairs.

A Device SHOULD bundle many log messages together into a single `LogBundle`.

A `LogBundle` MUST NOT be larger than the maximum size specified by the Controller for the Device, but MAY be smaller than that, if insufficient messages are available or the Device network or endpoints cannot handle the maximum size. The Device MUST retrieve the maximum `LogBundle` message size from the appropriate field of the configuration.

A log message is expected to be reliable. A Device MUST retry until it successfully delivers log messages. How often log messages are sent, retries, the number of messages and which types to bundle together into a single `LogBundle`,  and other caching mechanisms on the Device are NOT specified here, as they are implementation questions.

Response:

The response MUST contain no body content.

### newlogs

Send Device logs to Controller

   POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/id/{uuid}/newlogs

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `201`
* Unknown Device: `400`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use the Device certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The senderCerthash MUST be set to the hash of the Device certificate.

The request MUST be of mime type "application/x-proto-binary".

The request body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a gzip binary message. The binary message is the compressed data and it contains one or more entries, separated by newline '\n' character, of type [log.LogEntry](./go/logs/log.pb.go) in JSON format. Gzip message has the 'header' structure which contains 'Comment', 'Name' strings, and 'ModTime' encoded with golang time.Time format directly. The 'Comment' field is used to encode 'devID', 'image' and 'eveVersion' of the 'LogBundle' [log.LogBundle](./go/logs/log.pb.go) message in JSON format, and the 'ModTime' field is used for the gzip file creation time. The 'Name' field is not used.

A binary Gzip message MUST NOT be larger than the maximum size specified by the Controller for the Device, but MAY be smaller than that.

Response:

The response MAY contain zero or one message of type [log.ServerMetrics](./go/logs/log.pb.go) in JSON format, which comprises the controller CPU usage in percentage, and the controller log message processing time delay in milliseconds.

### Application Instance newlogs

Send Application logs to Controller

   POST api/v2/edgeDevice/apps/instanceid/{app-instance-uuid}/newlogs

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `201`
* Unknown Application Instance: `400`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use the Device certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The senderCerthash MUST be set to the hash of the Device certificate.

The request MUST be of mime type "application/x-proto-binary".

The request body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a gzip binary message. The binary message is the compressed data and it contains one or more entries, separated by newline '\n' character, of type [log.LogEntry](./go/logs/log.pb.go) in JSON format. Gzip message has the 'header' structure which contains 'Comment' and 'Name' strings, and 'ModTime' encoded with golang time.Time format directly. The 'Name' field is used to encode the 'Application Name' string, and the 'ModTime' field is used the gzip file creation time. The 'Comment' field is not used.

A binary Gzip message MUST NOT be larger than the maximum size specified by the Controller for the Device, but MAY be smaller than that.

Response:

The response MUST contain no body content.

### flowlog

The flowlog API is used by the device to send network flow statistics (TCP and UDP
flows with IP addresses, port numbers, counters, whether dropped or accepted),
and also the hostname to IP address mapping as seen by the device.

   POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/id/{uuid}/flowlog

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `201`
* Unknown Device: `400`
* Missing or unprocessable body: `422`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request MUST use the Device certificate to sign the protectedPayload in the AuthContainer. The senderCerthash MUST be set to the hash of the Device certificate.

The request MUST be of mime type "application/x-proto-binary".

The request body MUST be a protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [flowlog.FlowMessage](./proto/flowlog/flowlog.proto). The message itself contains zero or more entries of type [flowlog.FlowRecord](./proto/flowlog/flowlog.proto) and/or zero or more entries of type [flowlog.DnsRequest](./proto/flowlog/flowlog.proto).

A `FlowMessage` MUST NOT be larger than the maximum size specified by the Controller for the Device, but MAY be smaller than that, if insufficient messages are available or the Device network or endpoints cannot handle the maximum size. The Device MUST retrieve the maximum `FlowMessage` message size from the appropriate field of the configuration.

A flowlog message is expected to be reliable. A Device MUST retry until it successfully delivers log messages. However, if there is more recent information for flows, e.g., updated counters, that information can be sent instead of retransmitting old information as long as no flows are omitted. How often log messages are sent, retries, the number of entries to bundle together into a single `FlowMessage`,  and other caching mechanisms on the Device are NOT specified here, as they are implementation questions.

Response:

The response MUST contain no body content.

## Caching Policy

Edge Devices are expected to have intermittent connectivity, with limited bandwidth, memory and storage. It is likely that, at some point, a Device will run out of local memory or storage to cache information, logs or metrics messages that need to be sent to a Controller.

The choice of which messages to keep, how long to keep them, which to discard, and how to handle these overflows are implementation-dependent and are NOT specified in this document.

### UUID

Retrieve uuid for a specific Device.

   POST /api/v2/edgeDevice/uuid

Return codes:

* Unauthenticated or invalid credentials: `401`
* Valid credentials without authorization: `403`
* Success: `200`
* Unknown Device: `400`
* Controller is unavailable e.g., being upgraded: `503`

Request:

The request mime type MUST be "application/x-proto-binary".
The request MUST have the body of a single protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [uuid.UuidRequest](./proto/uuid/uuid.proto).

Response:

The response mime type MUST be "application/x-proto-binary".
The response MUST contain a single protobuf message of type AuthContainer where the AuthBody is a protobuf message of type [uuid.UuidResponse](./proto/uuid/uuid.proto). It must include UUID of the device, along with other fields such as device's registered name, Manufacturer, Model, Enterprise.

## HTTP MetaData

Edge Devices may send some MetaData in HTTP header to the controller. This will help
the controller side troubleshooting at the HTTP level. The Device UUID can be included
in the HTTP header 'X-Request-ID'. Since the UUID on Device is obtained from the
controller, when the UUID is not available yet, the Device Serial-Number and
Soft-Serial-Number can be included in the HTTP header fields 'X-Serial-Number' and
'X-Soft-Serial' respectively.
